<h1>Lesson: Introduction to Collections</h1>
<p>A <i>collection</i> &#151; sometimes called a container &#151; is simply an object that groups multiple elements into a single unit. Collections are used to store, retrieve, manipulate, and communicate aggregate data. Typically, they represent data items that form a natural group, such as a poker hand (a collection of cards), a mail folder (a collection of letters), or a telephone directory (a mapping of names to phone numbers). If you have used the Java programming language &#151; or just about any other programming language &#151; you are already familiar with collections.</p>
<h2>What Is a Collections Framework?</h2>
<p>A <i>collections framework</i> is a unified architecture for representing and manipulating collections. All collections frameworks contain the following:</p>
<ul>
<li><b>Interfaces:</b> These are abstract data types that represent collections. Interfaces allow collections to be manipulated independently of the details of their representation. In object-oriented languages, interfaces generally form a hierarchy.</li>
<li><b>Implementations:</b> These are the concrete implementations of the collection interfaces. In essence, they are reusable data structures.</li>
<li><b>Algorithms:</b> These are the methods that perform useful computations, such as searching and sorting, on objects that implement collection interfaces. The algorithms are said to be <i>polymorphic</i>: that is, the same method can be used on many different implementations of the appropriate collection interface. In essence, algorithms are reusable functionality.</li>
</ul>
<p>Apart from the Java Collections Framework, the best-known examples of collections frameworks are the C++ Standard Template Library (STL) and Smalltalk&#39;s collection hierarchy. Historically, collections frameworks have been quite complex, which gave them a reputation for having a steep learning curve. We believe that the Java Collections Framework breaks with this tradition, as you will learn for yourself in this chapter.</p>
<h2>Benefits of the Java Collections Framework</h2>
<p>The Java Collections Framework provides the following benefits:</p>
<ul>
<li><b>Reduces programming effort:</b> By providing useful data structures and algorithms, the Collections Framework frees you to concentrate on the important parts of your program rather than on the low-level &quot;plumbing&quot; required to make it work. By facilitating interoperability among unrelated APIs, the Java Collections Framework frees you from writing adapter objects or conversion code to connect APIs.</li>
<li><b>Increases program speed and quality:</b> This Collections Framework provides high-performance, high-quality implementations of useful data structures and algorithms. The various implementations of each interface are interchangeable, so programs can be easily tuned by switching collection implementations. Because you&#39;re freed from the drudgery of writing your own data structures, you&#39;ll have more time to devote to improving programs&#39; quality and performance.</li>
<li><b>Allows interoperability among unrelated APIs:</b> The collection interfaces are the vernacular by which APIs pass collections back and forth. If my network administration API furnishes a collection of node names and if your GUI toolkit expects a collection of column headings, our APIs will interoperate seamlessly, even though they were written independently.</li>
<li><b>Reduces effort to learn and to use new APIs:</b> Many APIs naturally take collections on input and furnish them as output. In the past, each such API had a small sub-API devoted to manipulating its collections. There was little consistency among these ad hoc collections sub-APIs, so you had to learn each one from scratch, and it was easy to make mistakes when using them. With the advent of standard collection interfaces, the problem went away.</li>
<li><b>Reduces effort to design new APIs:</b> This is the flip side of the previous advantage. Designers and implementers don&#39;t have to reinvent the wheel each time they create an API that relies on collections; instead, they can use standard collection interfaces.</li>
<li><b>Fosters software reuse:</b> New data structures that conform to the standard collection interfaces are by nature reusable. The same goes for new algorithms that operate on objects that implement these interfaces.</li>
</ul>
