<h1>Lesson: Classes and Objects</h1>
<!--#usemacro TUT4E_PRELIM (
)-->
<p>With the knowledge you now have of the basics of the Java programming language, you can learn to write your own classes. In this 
lesson, 
you will find information about defining your own classes, including declaring member variables, methods, and constructors.</p>
<p>You will learn to use your classes to create objects, and how to use the objects you create.</p>
<p>This 
lesson 
 also covers nesting classes within other classes, and enumerations 
<h2>
<a class="TutorialLink" target="_top" href="classes.html">Classes</a></h2>

This section shows you the anatomy of a class, and how
to declare fields, methods, and constructors.



<!--<h2>
<a class="TutorialLink" target="_top" href="subclasses.html">Getting Started</a></h2>

This section covers issues relating to class hierarchies:
how to override methods, hide methods or member variables,
how to use super, the use of final to prevent subclassing,
the use of abstract methods and classes.

-->
<h2>
<a class="TutorialLink" target="_top" href="objects.html">Objects</a></h2>

This section covers creating and using objects. You will learn how to instantiate an object, and, 
once instantiated, how to use the <code>dot</code> operator to access the object's instance variables and methods.
<h2>
<a class="TutorialLink" target="_top" href="more.html">More on Classes</a></h2>

This section covers more aspects of classes that depend on using object references and the <code>dot</code> operator 
that you learned about in the preceding section: 
returning values from methods, the <code>this</code> keyword, class vs. instance members, and access control.
<h2>
<a class="TutorialLink" target="_top" href="nested.html">Nested Classes</a></h2>

Static nested classes, inner classes, anonymous inner
classes, local classes, and lambda expressions are covered.
There is also a discussion on when to use which approach.



<h2>
<a class="TutorialLink" target="_top" href="enum.html">Enum Types</a></h2>

This section covers enumerations, specialized classes that allow you to define and use sets of constants.

</p>
