<h1>Lesson: Exceptions</h1>
<p>The Java programming language uses <i>exceptions</i> to handle errors and other exceptional events. This lesson describes when and how to use exceptions. 
<h2>
<a class="TutorialLink" target="_top" href="definition.html">What Is an Exception?</a></h2>

<p>An exception is an event that occurs during the execution of a program that disrupts the normal flow of instructions.</p>

<h2>
<a class="TutorialLink" target="_top" href="catchOrDeclare.html">The Catch or Specify Requirement</a></h2>

<p>This section covers how to catch and handle exceptions. The discussion includes the <tt>try</tt>, <tt>catch</tt>, and <tt>finally</tt> blocks, as well as chained exceptions and logging.</p>

<h2>
<a class="TutorialLink" target="_top" href="throwing.html">How to Throw Exceptions</a></h2>

<p>This section covers the <tt>throw</tt> statement and the <tt>Throwable</tt> class and its subclasses.</p>

<h2>
<a class="TutorialLink" target="_top" href="tryResourceClose.html">The try-with-resources Statement</a></h2>

<p>This section describes the <code>try</code>-with-resources statement, which is a <code>try</code> statement that declares one or more resources. A resource is as an object that must be closed after the program is finished with it. The <code>try</code>-with-resources statement ensures that each resource is closed at the end of the statement.</p>

<h2>
<a class="TutorialLink" target="_top" href="runtime.html">Unchecked Exceptions &#151; The Controversy</a></h2>

<p>This section explains the correct and incorrect use of the unchecked exceptions indicated by subclasses of <code>RuntimeException</code>.</p>

<h2>
<a class="TutorialLink" target="_top" href="advantages.html">Advantages of Exceptions</a></h2>

<p>The use of  exceptions to manage errors has some advantages over traditional error-management techniques. You'll learn more in this section.</p>

<h2>
<a class="TutorialLink" target="_top" href="summary.html">Summary</a></h2>

<h2>
<a class="TutorialLink" target="_top" href="QandE/questions.html">Questions and Exercises</a></h2>

 
</p>

